Test, one, two, three. Test, one, two, three. It
doesn't have a little. OK. Do
you mind if I pull up this chair? No.
This is an interview with Dr. Wendy Stock by
Christine Aschenbeck on December 1st, 1992 at
Texas A&M University in the Psychology Building
concerning the feminist movement today. In the
interest of accumulating knowledge, I'm asking
you to donate this tape to me onto the Texas A&M Oral
History Collection website. in the university
archives. Is that all right with you? Yeah, that's
fine.
Well, first, could we collect some biographical
data? Tell me about your life. Where did you grow
up? I was born in 1954 in San Francisco, and I grew up
there until I was 18. I went to public schools. I
went to UC Berkeley for four years as an
undergraduate and received my bachelor's in
psychology in 1972. And then I went to State
University of New York at Stony Brook, which is on
Long Island, New York. And I was there for seven
years, from 1976 to 1983. And after seven years,
received my doctorate and had received my
master's in 1980 there. And my doctorate is in the
area of clinical psychology. In 1983, when I
finished, I took a job in Florida, West Palm Beach,
Florida, for one year as the director of a clinic
for the treatment of sexual dysfunctions. And
terminated that job after a year due to...
disagreements with my bosses who seemed
interested in making a lot of money on medical
procedures for male impotence rather than
treatment, psychological treatment. I became a
research scientist in fall 1984 at Texas A&M. and
was in that position for two years as project
coordinator on a National Institute of Health
research grant on differentiating psychogenic
from organic causes of erectile dysfunction. In
1986, I was hired as a visiting assistant
professor. In 1987, I was hired tenure track, and I
have completed my five years of tenure track. and
have been denied tenure by the university this
fall, 1992. I can talk more about the political
stuff if that's what you want, like growing up, or
unless you want to have specific questions on
that. I guess you'd mentioned going to Berkeley,
and that must have been in the early 70s? Yeah, 72 to
76. neat time to be going there, I guess there was
lots of activism at that time? A fair amount,
although I was always annoyed because I had missed
the free speech movement, which occurred in the
mid-60s, 1966, 1967. And as a kid, when I was 13 in
1967, which was the Summer of Love in the San
Francisco Haight-Ashbury, and I was a little
hippie-type kid. I was a straight-A student, but I
adopted the jeans and the beads and so forth. And I
also had been reading the paper and became
convinced that Vietnam was a mistake, that we
shouldn't be fighting there, and became active in
the anti-war movement when I attended my first
peace march at age 13 in San Francisco. So my
activism really started then, rather than when I
started as a freshman at Berkeley. My mother
forbade me to go to the peace march. She was afraid
I'd get my head bashed in and I went anyway, and she
said that she would punish me, and I said, okay, and
she did. She grounded me from doing my volunteer
work at an animal museum, which really upset me,
but I still felt I had done the right thing. So that
kind of shaped the way that I've handled things
since, which is if basically something seems
right to me, I generally will do it, even if someone
is threatening me because it seems to me an
important choice to have, to be able to do things
like that. So my mother contributed to my activism
without really intending to at all. And my father
did, just by being such an authoritarian kind of
tyrant. He had been brought up in Germany, and he
had very traditional German notions about
discipline. He used to say, you'll do what I do and
you'll think what I think as long as you're under
this roof. And, of course, that had the absolute
opposite effect. So early, early in my teens, I
really... felt that I had a right to think for
myself and was not going to be the robot of my
parents' making. So after this first anti-war
demonstration, I became active in the student
anti-war movement. And in junior high and high
school, I participated in demonstrations,
peaceful demonstrations, moratoriums where we
had walkouts during school time to protest the
war, pamphleting, writing letters, walking in
peace marches. I never have supported violence as
a means for social change. There may be conditions
under which that would be necessary, but I haven't
experienced those conditions myself. And I
pretty much abhor the use of violence on people, or
anyone, and living creatures. So I was active in
that movement. I got suspended once in high school
for doing an anti-war activity. And this was
really difficult for my mother, who was a public
school teacher, to handle, that I was getting in
trouble for anything and she didn't really care a
lot. I also became active in the United Farm
Workers movement. These were very underpaid
Hispanic workers coming from Mexico generally
and were paid less than the minimum wage and had
been subjected to pesticide use that caused them
to have a lot of illness and cancer. So they were
striking, there was a grape strike and then a
lettuce, grape boycott and lettuce boycott and I
helped with other students, helped picket for the
farm workers and it was sort of like a student group
that would do this sort of activity. And we tried to
educate people about their situation and their
need for a union, which the boycott was in support
of Cesar Chavez's union. And also I was a member of
the Sierra Club and got very into the ecology
movement in high school. I was into recycling. We
recycled cans and glass and newspaper and all the
stuff that people are doing still now. And I
thought I might go into that as a career, to go into
something to do with ecology or conservation of
natural resources. I wasn't sure what I was going
to do in high school. I also became aware of
feminism. I read this book, Sisterhood is
Powerful. It's like an early feminist work, an
anthology of writings. And another one called
Woman in Sexist Society. And then I also had the
first edition of Our Bodies, Our Cells, which now
has like... quadrupled in size, I think. Who is
that book by? Boston Woman's Health Collective.
It was out in newsprint when I first got it. Now it's
this huge book and there's so much more
information. So I realized, well, I'm a woman and
these things are going to apply to me and in some
ways already do. It seemed to me like another
important struggle. And so I just felt that a big
part of my life was trying to change social
conditions and trying to make the world better.
And I thought perhaps maybe I would someday join
the Peace Corps or VISTA. So in high school, those
were my concerns. I wasn't specifically
interested in psychology. There wasn't even a
class in it, so I was interested in people. I just
didn't really know what direction I was going to
take in college. I started out in Berkeley as
pre-med. How did you choose Berkeley? It was the
closest major university in the area and I had
pretty high scores and grades. My mother went
there and that Really, that was the one thing that I
agreed with her on. I think she has very good taste
in the university. That I like the campus, and it
was the highest quality university in my area. And
I thought it would be the place to go. And the
political activism there appealed to me, because
we used to see what was going on there. And then in
our student groups, we would try to replicate some
of those things. And Berkeley was a very active
place. During the time I was there, the United
States was still bombing in Vietnam and Cambodia.
And my freshman quarter in spring of 72, we had
invaded, I believe, Cambodia. And I think the Gulf
of Tonkin was happening around then. And there was
a huge moratorium and strike by students at the
university to shut down the university and
protest. And it was really, it may seem strange in
retrospect, but it was the only way students felt
they could be heard. They weren't workers. They
couldn't strike their place of work. People did
write letters and petition. But absenting
themselves from the place where they were
basically working as students was the only way
they felt they could have an impact. So I was
involved in that strike. And what happened is some
of the people that were in the anti-war movement,
mostly the street people who hung out around the
university who were not students, became violent
during these demonstrations and started
throwing things into the windows of local
merchants, which was really stupid because most
of the merchants were supportive of the anti-war
movement. Anyway, they destroyed a lot of
property about a block away from where I lived in
the dorms, and I remember studying for midterms my
first time ever in college, having to put wet
towels under the cracks of the door and windows
because tear gas was coming in, and I didn't want to
inhale tear gas and be unable to study for my tests.
I had to go through two tax squads to get in and out of
my dorm for several weeks during my first quarter.
So that made an impression on me. I also saw the
Oakland police drive like 60 miles an hour down a
street that was filled with people just walking.
And if anyone had not been able to get out of the way,
they would have been run over. And I saw these guys
with their billy clubs advancing on peaceful
demonstrators and I know people who were beaten
up. that weren't throwing rocks and that were
just, like, going to class. So that also
politicized me. It made me even more distrustful
of the police and the abuses that the police have
been put to historically in this country. You're
probably aware how they could use to break up
strikes and kill people, even, like, carrying
silkwood on people's backs. So I saw them doing
this to people that weren't being violent and
destructive, and I think it was educational, kind
of chilling.
What was your first activity towards the feminist
movement, or when did that become a main concern
with you? There wasn't really a feminist group in
high school, and I wasn't a member of a feminist
group in college. I wasn't a member of NOW. NOW
seemed very, like, middle class and too
traditional in Berkeley. I worked as a rape
counselor for a while, and that continued to make
me more aware of women's issues.
There were women's studies classes, and I took a
number of comparative lit courses in women and
literature. I took a year's worth to satisfy some
of my requirements, and I became aware of women
writers, and that a lot of them were writing
feminist kinds of works, even earlier writers.
like Doris Lessing and Grace Paley and some of the
new writers were coming out with fairly feminist
material. So it was actually through literature
and in psychology there were studies that were
starting to be done in the area of psychology of
women and I just scarfed these things up. I also
lived in an all-women's living situation called a
student cooperative for four years and I guess
through living in that situation I became aware of
how much women could do because we did our own
maintenance and so I became a part of the
maintenance crew and learned how to do wiring and
learned how to do the drill and electric saws and
Cousinly masculine. Right. And I'd never been
particularly socialized to be traditionally
feminine. My mother was a whack in the army in World
War II. So she was really kind of a tomboy when she
was growing up. And she never enforced femininity
on me. But I hadn't had the experience of working in
male kinds of trades and things. And this taught me
that I could do a lot more than I realized. And other
women were even better at it than I was. And there
were women who were electronics experts and
wiring experts. And I was like, I was educated by
that. And I also assumed leadership in the house. I
was the manager for a year. That leadership
experience was useful. So it's sort of by
immersion in a woman-run situation and working in
the rape crisis center and reading psychology of
women articles that were just beginning to come
out at that time, looking at the issue of sex
differences and finding there really aren't that
many, realizing that a lot of this role had been
hoisted on a woman by brainwashing, cultural
brainwashing, and that it wasn't really
inherent. So I decided that women's issues would
probably be my focus, and as I applied for graduate
school in my senior year, what I hoped to do was to
get into a program where I could do my master's
thesis and doctoral work on psychology of women,
and particularly what interested me was therapy
for women, and what kinds of therapy would help
women to kind of throw off their social role and
develop themselves more as full individuals. So I
had started to read some of the beginning work in
feminist therapy. Is that how you came to be
interested in sexual therapy? Well, kind of by
mistake, actually. When I got to graduate school,
there was no one on the faculty who was doing
psychology of women. There was only one female
faculty member out of 15, and she worked with
autistic children. And I don't like children. I
don't like to work with children. That was the last
thing in the world I wanted anything to do with. And
no one was doing feminist stuff. I was interested
in consciousness-raising groups, and did those
have a therapeutic effect? And I wanted to test
that. No one was doing that. There was a woman in
another department who was the head of women's
studies, but she was already overcommitted, and
she couldn't take me on. And that felt like a
crushing blow that They just wasn't a mentor for me
in my area. So I asked around in the psych
department and found that there was a researcher
in the clinical area who did sex research and he
wanted someone to do sex research on women. And his
student that he had been a mentor for had gone on and
finished her doctorate and he had a opening for
another student so i talked with him and i decided
to work with him since sexuality was always
interesting to me and i felt that women were
oppressed in many ways sexually and that we had a
lot to learn about female sexuality and i thought i
could integrate my interest in feminism and women
psycho woman with sexuality so i would not have
thought of that field right off the bat it It had
always been an interesting area to me, but I'd
never thought of myself as going into sex
research. But once I got in, I realized that the
potential for working as a feminist sex
researcher was very high, that I could do a lot. And
plus, I then became fascinated by the field, that
it's just, to me now, an inherently fascinating
field. Did today's research in sexual behavior,
human sexual behavior, how has that field of study
helped deteriorate the myths of of the
inequalities between men and women? Well, some of
the physiological research has shown that women
can become sexually aroused as easily and as
quickly as men. That if you look at how long it takes
for women to reach orgasm on their own, it's just as
quick as men. So this myth that women take longer,
you know, and that they're less sexual has been
disproven. It's really whether they're getting
adequate stimulation or not from their partners.
And unfortunately, a lot of Men in our culture have
not yet been educated enough to know how to be a
lover, a good lover, to women. And women
themselves have not felt entitled to speak up
about what they want. Some of the other research
has resulted in women becoming more aware of their
bodies and how their bodies work and so that
they're more able to communicate and less ashamed
of their sexuality than women used to be. But I
think we have a long way to go. So in dealing with
sexual therapy, I would imagine that you would
come across many studies dealing with
relationships and the roles that men and women do
play in them. So I would imagine that, would that
also be, contribute to deteriorating the
socialization? Yeah, in addition to the
physiological end of the research, the research
that we know we have known in relationships shows
how important communication is and how important
affectionate touching is to women,
particularly. and how important equality is in a
relationship for marital and sexual happiness,
that there is research showing that women are most
highly sexually satisfied when they're in
egalitarian relationships, plus they're more
satisfied and happy in the relationship anyway.
And those things tend to go together for women,
that it's very hard for women to be sexually happy
if they are not emotionally happy in the
relationship, because those things are very
connected. You were saying that you try to
incorporate some of your feminist viewpoints
into human sexual behaviors in psychology. I was
wondering how would you define feminism? To me,
it's the right to be treated equally to men and to
have all the same advantages and privileges and
opportunities. in our culture and our society.
But men do. Equal opportunity. Yeah. Okay. There
was a book, I don't know if you read it since you were
talking about reading about early books
published by women about studies dealing with
women's roles. It was called Betty Freedom, The
Feminine Mystique. In her book, she makes a
comparison between a woman's role in the house.
She makes a comparison between the American
household and a concentration camp. It's pretty
radical. But I was wondering, how do you feel, how
has that role changed? Hmm. For Dan's book, it
actually came out when I was a little kid, I think in
the early 60s, and I did read it later in my 20s as an
historical work. And I don't remember that
comparison. I think... Some things have changed
about that role, and some things have not. A lot
more women, half of all women now, I think, work
outside the home. Half of all mothers work outside
the home. And so women are not constrained as much
to just having that one source of reinforcement,
which isn't much of a source of reinforcement. The
problem with House being a homemaker
traditionally has been that the work is
invisible. No one comes around and compliments
you or acknowledges you. It's unpaid. No one gives
you bonuses or pay raises. It's isolated in that
you're working alone. You're not working with
other people. And it's repetitive because every
time, every day, the dishes have to be done again
and the laundry has to be done again. So there isn't
a sense of completion and having a product, a
finished product at the end. It's just repetitive
work. And recognition
for their work.
etc. The problem is that women end up usually then
doing twice as much work and there's a book that's
written by a sociologist named Arlen Hauschild
called The Second Shift and it talks about how
women often work full-time jobs and then they come
home and do 80% of the housework and child care if
not more and get very little assistance. So in some
ways that hasn't changed because working two
shifts is not exactly liberation. How do you
foresee that role changing in the future or do you I
hope it will change. I feel like I have good
predictive powers. Women, I think, need to insist
that men help them with their housework, and men
need to be socialized to view this as part of their
normal activities as well. Parents bringing
children up need to hopefully raise boys and girls
to feel that they'll be equal partners and take
equal responsibility for all things in a
relationship. And this is going to be a long-term
change, I'm sure. But I think that for the short
term, women in relationships are just going to
have to demand that this person that they're with
help them, not do the work themselves. On the issue
of equality between women and women, it brings me
to the subject of now. The National Organization
of Women. And I was wondering how, I know you've
done research on pornography. Is this movement
active on the pornography issue? Actually, now
it's split on that issue as are most other feminist
organizations. There is a platform in now, a
position that pornography is oppressive to
women, and where they're split is whether or not to
support the legislation, the model
anti-pornography ordinance proposed by Dworkin
and McKinnon. Another way that they're split is in
terms of where now is placing its priorities. I had
a chance to talk with the president of now this last
August, Joel Ireland, who came to the Texas Now
conference in Beaumont and had lunch, I got to have
lunch with her and a group of activists from Texas
and I asked her about the pornography issue
specifically and what about Now's platform and
what are they going to be doing and she said, well,
you know, it's an important issue and I do think
it's harmful but we've got a lot of other things
cooking right now that I think are more important
to women such as abortion rights and I totally
agree with her. I mean, that's been, pornography
has been my area of research for a long time and it's
an area I care about and feel strongly about. But in
women's day-to-day existence, if we have to
decide which battles we're going to fight
politically, I'm supportive of now fighting to
keep freedom of choice in that area first and deal
with the pornography later. I'll still continue
to work in both areas. How has NOW's platform
influenced legislation on reproductive rights?
Or what are some of the... How did they move to...
Did they move to make people publicly aware of the
issue? Yeah, in a number of ways. NOW has
educational presentations at the chapter level.
Chapters are what you have in each city or town. The
Texas A&M chapter is one of the local ways that now
does educational presentations. We show films.
We have discussions. We show films sometimes from
both the anti-abortion and pro-abortion and have
people discuss it. It's pretty hot sometimes. And
in addition to education, now engages in
petitions and letter writing and lobbying of
state representatives and national senators and
congresspeople. on that issue. They also have a
legal defense and education fund, which helps
provide legal and financial support to people who
are involved in lawsuits, and I believe that now
has supported several legal battles having to do
with abortion rights. So it's active on a lot of
fronts, trying to keep the option open for women to
choose, and this is really important to
understand that people are glorifying abortion
in this movement at all or thinking about that's
the best strategy of controlling pregnancy, but
that women should have the choice. I was wondering
if we could look at the feminist movements you
point on reproductive rights and then get back to
other issues that now holds. Would that be all
right? Yeah. Okay. What are some, how does, there
are two, first I would like to discuss the division
in feminism that you were speaking of. There's a
movement of radical feminism and then there's
moderate, I believe. Is that correct? Well, yeah,
there are different parts of feminists in this
movement. Do they all hold the same viewpoint on
reproductive rights? No. Yeah, they're not
divided on most issues. Generally, there would be
complete agreement on keeping abortion legal.
What is the difference between individuals of the
feminist movement today? I
don't know if it's really as divided as the media
presents it, because in general, the feminist
movement is larger, now has a larger membership,
and it's working more effectively than it ever has
before to keep freedom of choice for women and to
argue for other sexual harassment issues so it's
not like a split ineffective movement and there
actually were there was an editorial by sally
quinn there's this writer for the washington post
who said feminism is dead and we feminism isn't
addressing the needs of the common women and women
and that was like um responded to by joe ireland and
people would know and basically say this is bull
you know that feminism is going strong and you
don't know what you're talking about ladies And
it's true, it really is a big, strong movement. And
there are a lot of internal splits. Historically,
one split that was between maybe radical
feminists and moderate feminists was over
whether lesbians should be allowed to be members
of NOW. And this occurred in the late 60s. Betty
Friedan was against having lesbians be up front
members of NOW and having a pro-lesbian or gay
rights platform in NOW. She felt that that would
give people more of a view that all feminists are
lesbians, and that we couldn't afford as
feminists to affiliate ourselves in this way,
because that would lead to too much negative
stereotyping. And what happened is, actually,
there were many women in now, not the majority, but
maybe a third or a fourth of the women who started
now who were lesbians, and they felt enraged by
this, and really hurt, like they had gotten the
whole thing going, and supported Friedan, and
done a lot of the work, and been out there on the
front lines, and organized women's shelters and
women's bookstores and now chapters. And then
they were being told that they were not wanted in
the organization. So they rose up and they formed
this group called the Lavender Menace. They took
over the stage at one of these conventions and they
demanded that Nell's policy change. What
happened is Nell did reject the lesbian members
for several years and then its policy was changed
and lesbians rejoin now. So predominantly the
membership is, you know, pretty heterosexual,
but there's probably maybe less than a fourth,
maybe a tenth of the membership, or some portion,
maybe no more than the population proportion,
maybe a tenth to a fifth are lesbians, because
lesbians tend to have a feminist awareness
because they're already oppressed in terms of
their sexual orientation. They also tend to share
the value of feminism, it'd be kind of nuts not to.
Right. For them not to. So that was one division,
but that's kind of like now, you know, we have an
openly bisexual president of now, Joe Ireland.
has come out, she was brought out, but she has
publicly come out as having a female lover and
still being married to her husband, who she loves
very much and has been very supportive. So, you
know, best of both worlds, I guess. I don't know how
she does it, but she's been accepted, and people
knew this about her and voted her in anyway. So that
division is by the wayside, and the only other
division I can think of is the one over
pornography, and that's not so much between
moderate and radical feminists, because even
among radical feminists, There's division. Some
of them are saying women should have all kinds of
pornography available to them, and that we are
trying to protect women from sexuality in a way
that's actually demeaning, that women are old
enough, they're mature enough to make their own
decisions, and blah, blah, blah. And we don't want
the government to censor more materials. And then
the other group is the Dworkin McKinnon group. But
that's really a split throughout. all feminists
about what to do with pornography. So I wouldn't
characterize there really being a radical
feminist versus moderate feminist split. Do you
feel that the feminist viewpoint on pornography
will be given legislative attention as has been
done in Canada now? Eventually, I think it will.
I've been asked to present at a conference coming
up in March at the University of Chicago Law
School, and thanks. Dworkin's going to be there,
McKinnon's going to be there, and these are people
I know and I've met, but it's just going to be by kind
of a think tank. All of the activists who've worked
in this area and scientists and researchers are
going to be there and trying to talk about, all
right, what strategy to take next. And Anita Hill
is going to be there. She's going to be one of those
speakers. That's going to be interesting. Oh,
it's just going to be a dynamite conference. So I
think after that conference, people are going to
sort of figure out where to go next with this. But
definitely the Canadian precedent is something
that people are going to take and try to encourage
to happen in the United States. I'd say it probably
will take at least another 10 years, at least. It's
a very hard fight because there's so many economic
interests. And I mentioned in class that the
American Booksellers Association, which is
Hastings and Wallen Books and all these huge
corporations who profit from selling magazines,
pornography magazines, don't want any control on
that stuff because they'll lose millions of
dollars in profits. So they're funding the battle
against. It's not just pornographers. It's like
anybody else who benefits from it. I was going to
ask you about NOW and the correlation between NOW
and the feminist movement. Is NOW the only tool
that the feminist movement has? No, it's the
largest national organization, but there's
another one that Ellie Smeal started. She was a
former president of NOW, two presidents ago. She
started an organization called Feminist
Majority, which funds candidates for office.
women candidates and actually helped fund a lot of
the women who ran for senator and representative
this time around. And she believes, Ellie
believes that The only way women are going to
really be able to change the system is to get
elected to office. We've got to put priority on
that. So there's that organization. Many people
are members of both. I think I'm a member of both. I
know I'm a member of now, and I think I've paid my
dues to the other one this year. There's also
specific abortion rights groups like National
Abortion Rights Action League, NERA. that's
focused on just, you know, keeping abortion
legal, and there are state divisions of that.
There's Terol, which is a Texas abortion rights
action league. Other feminist groups... There's
another one that's just started called the Third
Party or something, and it's like to get a third
political party that would be more responsive to
the needs of women in minority groups. I think
that's another separate feminist organization.
But now it's really the biggest. Okay. Um... What
got you interested in teaching sexual behaviors?
Just in, I guess it wasn't an interest, it was my
role when I applied to be a tenure track professor.
I'd already, I'd been allowed to teach some
courses as an assistant professor who was
visiting, but I hadn't taught the sex course yet
because the person I was working with, who was my
senior, taught the sexuality course here. And so I
just, it was part of the role I was hired for to teach
that particular course. And I knew immediately
that it would be a wonderful course to teach. And
the challenge for me was to teach it in a way that
gave the students the basic information that's in
the text, but also gave them more of a critical
awareness that this isn't the only information,
that there are different points of view, that this
is still a social construct that we need to be aware
of, the point of view of the researchers. And it's
hard to do that with an undergraduate class,
because it would be easy to talk about people's
heads. But it seems to me the students really do get
the idea after a while. understand why some of the
readings are there. The only way to do that is to
have this huge amount of reading, to have the
textbook and to have these articles which give
different points of view on the side. Do you feel
more in any way gratified that you're doing, that
you are educating undergraduate students on this
subject in what has been a traditional
conservative school? Yeah, I really do. I didn't
think about that when I started, but I really soon
became aware that the person who teaches that sort
of a course, probably anywhere, but especially
maybe a place like Texas A&M, that they're
addressing a need for information that has not
been addressed for many of these students before,
and that so many of the students in my classes come
and talk to me after class, or they'll come in and
shut the door, and they'll say, right, this
happened to me or I have a question and they've
never been able to ask anybody before and I realize
that there is an atmosphere of trust that happens
in that class and that's very important and that I
can help individual students as well as teaching
these ideas and in terms of challenging
traditional beliefs I do think that the class
succeeds in doing that and that it opens people to a
different point of view that I don't think that
they would have gotten exposure to I know if I was
teaching this course in New York or California
where I'm from, I would just sort of be like, oh,
yeah, yeah, yeah, you know, we know that, and I
would just sort of be like, you know, like a lot of
other profs there, and the students would They're
not all completely educated and liberated, but
they would have more of an idea. And now here I feel
almost like a missionary in a strange place. I'm
speaking these things like, oh, women have equal
rights, and people are all freaked out. And I'm
saying, no, women are sexual too. And I can see some
of the guys shifting around going, women aren't
sexual. We're just supposed to lie there. And I
don't think anyone would say that, but... I think
that some people come in with those kinds of
attitudes, and I can tell that people are thinking
a lot about the course. And I've had students come
up to me later, like years later, and say, wow, that
course was really a good course, and it really made
me think, and it's really helped me in my
relationships. And that's important to me. In a
nutshell, what would you say your teaching
strategy was for the class? What is the class
about?
The goal of the course, the objective, is to help
students to have a critical understanding of
sexuality, meaning an understanding of how
sexuality is created in our society, where it
comes from, where our ideas and beliefs come from,
and a greater appreciation for the malleability
of sexuality, that even if you're brought up in a
certain way, that there are many other people who
believe very differently. And maybe an
understanding of cultural differences and an
appreciation for people who are different
sexually, like gay and lesbian individuals, an
understanding of people who are gender
dysphoric, rather than just a condemnation or
prejudice, to understand what might make
somebody feel this way. So I guess creating
greater awareness and understanding of
sexuality for themselves and for their people.
You said you have your doctorate in clinical
psychology. Have you
ever... Have you ever been a sexual therapist?
Yes. Yeah, I do have a part-time private practice.
I see about eight clients a week. Okay. While
you're teaching. Yeah. Wow. And I like to do
clinical work. I don't know if I'd want to do it
full-time with people coming in and out every hour
on the hour. But... I really feel that's important
so that I can be a better teacher, and especially
for graduate students who I teach actually how to
do therapy, for me to be doing it and still have my
hand in it is pretty important. So yeah, I have done
that since when in graduate school you start
training as a therapist and seeing clients that in
your second year, so since age 23, and I'm 38 now,
and I started seeing sex cases four years into
graduate school, so I was like about 26 or 27. 26
when I started to see sex cases. And so I've been
carrying cases like that ever since. I see other
types as well. You know, I don't just treat sexual
dysfunctions. But that's definitely like my area
of specialization, that and women's issues. I'd
imagine that that field in itself that that sex
therapy has greatly expanded throughout the 70s,
80s, 90s. Yeah, yeah, it's definitely grown as a
field. Although in this town, I am the only really
highly trained person in that area. There are a few
people who have taken a few seminars and they do sex
therapy and they advertise as sex therapists in
the Yellow Pages, but I don't think they're really
highly trained. So it is kind of a specialty. Do you
feel that you have, so far, achieved your goal to
make people socially aware of the equality
between men and women? It's hard to know. From what
some students and people tell me after I give a
slide presentation on pornography, I get the
impression that it's making a difference. I know
that last year what NOW did to help support the
female cadets has made a difference. For a while, I
think that the women cadets were under scrutiny
and felt things were worse, but from what I have
heard from a few of them, there are less incidents
than there used to be, that it's not perfect, but
people are a lot more careful about the way they're
treating women and minorities there, and they've
gotten this big lecture on sexual harassment and
It's probably way far away from perfect, but I have
a feeling they just can't get away with the same
amount of crap. And so to me, that's effective
social change. It may make the life of a few women
better in the core. Hopefully. If it didn't, then
I'd be really upset. That was the intention. I
guess in conclusion, I would like to ask you what
you think is the main tool that the feminist
movement should use and has been using with
Education. Power. Basically, making political
change means acquiring enough power to do so. And
that means getting women elected into political
office. It means getting women in academia and
keeping them in academia and pushing the system to
do that. having women physicians, like now, there
are more women OBGYNs, so women aren't getting
treated as atrociously as they have been for many,
many years. It's beginning to change, to do
everything to support women to really take on
equal participation in all roles, particularly
leadership roles. Okay. Well, is there any
personal note you'd like to add? No. I wonder if I
disappointed you in terms of why I got into sex
research. It was just sort of serendipitous that
there was nothing in my family that, you know, made
me decide to do this. No.
But I really think, too, that education is very
powerful in itself to help bring about the lens of
change, so to speak. Yeah. Yeah, definitely.
Okay. Well, thank you very much. You're welcome.
It's always fun to talk about yourself.